Documentation: NS2 and NAM GUI Setup on Windows 11 with WSL 2 and Docker
Introduction
This documentation provides a step-by-step guide to run the Network Simulator 2 (NS2) and visualize the simulation results using the Network Animator (NAM) GUI on a Windows 11 machine. The setup uses WSL 2 for Linux compatibility, Docker for containerization, and VcXsrv for X11 forwarding to display the GUI.

Prerequisites
Windows 11 installed with WSL 2 support.

Linux distribution installed in WSL 2 (e.g., Ubuntu).

Docker Desktop installed and integrated with WSL 2.

VcXsrv installed on Windows for X server.

Step 1: Install and Configure WSL 2
Enable WSL 2

Open PowerShell as Administrator and run:

powershell
wsl --install
This installs WSL and sets WSL 2 as the default version. Restart your system if prompted.

Install a Linux distro

From Microsoft Store, install Ubuntu or your preferred Linux distribution. Launch it once and complete initial setup.

Step 2: Install Docker Desktop with WSL 2 Integration
Download and install Docker Desktop from Docker official site.

During installation, ensure WSL 2 integration is enabled.

After installation, open Docker Desktop, navigate to Settings → Resources → WSL Integration, and enable integration with your installed Linux distro.

Restart Docker Desktop and your WSL terminal.

Verify Docker is working in WSL:

bash
docker version
Step 3: Install and Configure VcXsrv on Windows
Download and install VcXsrv from SourceForge.

Launch XLaunch (comes with VcXsrv) and set the following options:

Display mode: Multiple windows

Display number: 0

Check Disable access control to allow external connections

Enable clipboard integration as needed

Finish the setup to start VcXsrv

Ensure VcXsrv icon appears in the system tray, confirming it is running.

Step 4: Allow X Server Access from WSL/Docker
Open your WSL terminal or Windows Command Prompt and run:

bash
xhost +local:root
This allows local clients such as Docker containers to connect to your Windows X server.

Step 5: Download and Run NS2 Docker Container
Pull the NS2 Docker image with:

bash
docker pull npranav10/ns2
Run the Docker container, mounting the X11 socket and passing DISPLAY environment variable:

bash
docker run -it \
  -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \
  -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \
  npranav10/ns2 bash
Step 6: Run NS2 and NAM GUI Inside Docker
Inside the Docker container shell, run your TCL simulation script, for example:

bash
ns test.tcl
After simulation completes, run NAM to open the graphical animation:

bash
nam out.nam
The NAM GUI window should open on your Windows desktop using VcXsrv.

Additional Notes
To persist files and environment between container sessions, use a container name in docker run and restart the same container with:

bash
docker start -ai <container-name>
If you have issues displaying GUI, verify:

VcXsrv is running with "Disable access control"

Windows firewall or antivirus allows VcXsrv connections

DISPLAY variable is set correctly in the container and WSL

Docker integration with WSL is enabled correctly

Summary
This guide shows how to set up a robust development environment running NS2 simulations and visualizing with NAM GUI on Windows 11 through WSL 2, Docker, and X11 forwarding with VcXsrv.